CITY GUIDE
House to Home
ince the 1990s, Window to the Past (WTP) has been the go-to place for many people a range of quality furniture with diverse designs. Its furniture, accessories, interior decorating, customisation and flexible leasing programmes make it a popular choice among newcomers to Singapore and long-term residents alike. Started by owner Mimi Somjee, the company has over 20 years of experience in furnishing homes all across Asia, Europe and the US. The showroom boasts more than 5,000 products, and features everything from contemporary trends in colour, wood and soft furnishings, to modern glass and steel pieces, and exotic Asian classics. Much of the furniture available ? with the exception of the antiques, of course ? is manufactured by WTP. Pieces can be purchased outright, rented month-to-month or leased long-term. Renting furniture is
a great choice for expats on a shorter-term stay, or those who have left their home furnished in their own country and don?t want to buy a whole new set here. Customers can kit out their entire home with leased furniture, as well as electronics, bedding and other sundries, and then choose to purchase their pieces for a nominal fee at the end of the lease.
3 Kung Chong Road 6235 2760 | wtpstyle.com
129
_Home B(Final).indd 129
9/7/15 6:56 pm
CITY GUIDE
Designs Online
History for the Home
Decor Republic, founded in 2013, sells unique home pieces and accessories. Some of its collection can be custom-made, and the store partners with various skilled craftsmen from around the world. Products include wallpaper and fabrics, as well as suar wood tables, wall sculptures and children?s bedroom accessories. Decor Republic has no bricks-and-mortar shop, but customers can browse and buy online.
Art Trend Heritage has a wide range of Asian furniture and home accessories in traditional and contemporary designs, including pieces from China and Myanmar. Its showroom is home to hundreds of items, ranging from elegantly carved cabinets to a wide variety of chairs, coffee tables, tables, screens and more. Also showcased are a collection of lacquerware, ancestral portraits, mirrors, lamps and other artefacts. Custom-made quality furniture can also be provided, with a choice of designs, materials and colours.
Art Trend Heritage 17 Binjai Park 6468 7116 | enquiries@arttrendheritage.com
8510 7210 | decor-republic.com
Unique Blend
The mix of modern and traditional styles at Bungalow 55 means that its products can fi t into a diverse range of homes. The store?s director NINA BEALE explains what customers can expect when visiting.
The he interior style of Bungalow 55 is a fusion of traditional and contemporary with th a nod to the tropics. The products on offer are timeless and not tied to any ny trend. The store offers an extensive range of items to help create beautiful rooms which are also functional and comfortable ? nautical-themed accessories, lamps, pendant lighting, rugs ? both indoor and outdoor ranges, cushions, prints and furniture. The emphasis of Bungalow 55 is using neutral tones as the base ? black, white and taupe, upe, and d then layering with contemporary elements for texture and glamour. mo
501 Bukit Timah Road #01-05A Cluny Court 6463 3831 thebungalow55.com
131
_Home B(Final).indd 131
9/7/15 6:56 pm
